# The Drawbacks of Pair Programming

Many companies are either increasingly assuring that they follow AGILE principles and some start-ups are trying to start out AGILE straight off the bat. Regardless of where these enterprises are in their journey, it’s more than likely that they’ve tried incorporating pair programming.
Pair programming is one of the most notable applications of AGILE software development. Essentially, two developers code on the same workstation or the same lines of code and take turns writing the code and looking over the code. It’s been proven to have many benefits to improving software quality and a developers’ understanding of the codebase. However, it is not without its drawbacks. 
<br><br>One drawback of pair programming is that one of the pair may stop being actively engaged. As one of the pair is writing the code (the driver), the other one looking of the code (the navigator) can become disengaged. This can happen where the driver either codes very efficiently without any need of the navigator’s input or the navigator themselves don’t feel pushed to overlook any code. If this happen, the advantage of having someone else evaluate the code, as it’s typed, becomes obsolete.
<br><br>Another drawback is that the driver needs to "program aloud". If the driver begins silently programming then the navigator may not understand what the intentions of the driver are. This can occur if the driver has a particularly personality type that doesn’t enjoy discussing their code as they type. As a result, the benefit of being in a pair in the first place is dramatically reduced.
<br><br>It costs more working hours to produce the same feature in any form of pairing. The level of experience in the developers can increase the coding cost if the more inexperienced driver codes for longer. Balance has to be maintained between quality of code and increased coding cost. 
<br><br>Something that may also occur if there’s a disparity in the level of experience between the two developers is a "watch the master" phenomenon. To elaborate, the novice developer may become the observer with the experienced member completing most of the coding. When this occurs, the novice developer rarely does any “driving” and doesn’t get to write code. As a consequence, there is no huge practical benefit to the pair programming together as the practice becomes a watch-and-learn tutorial as opposed to a ping-pong programming session.
<br><br>A scenario that may arise when two experienced developers pair up,  is a "developer's ego" phenomenon arising. In this, both developers may try to talk over the other and try to push his/her own ideas over the other. This could actually hinder the entire practice of pair programming because any form of cooperation in the pair is either severely disrupted or halted altogether as opposing ideas come to fruition.
<br><br>All in all, pair programming of course, isn’t a malpractice. However, after the aforementioned points, it’s clear to see that it’s a practice that only reaps its true benefits when it’s applied in the correct way. The nature of the project and the nature of the developers working on the code need to be deeply into consideration when choosing pair programming as a dedicated practice. 
